PAGE31
22
3.6
SCORING AND OUTPUT GENERATION MODULE
The Scoring and Output Generation module aggregates the results produced by the
RAG Retrieval, Topic Matching, and Bloom Classification modules to compute structured
evaluation outputs for each question. The aggregation layer combines the topic result –
comprising unit, unit title, matched topic, and Course Outcomes – with the Bloom result
comprising BT level and confidence score.
A difficulty score is computed deterministically using a fixed Bloom-level weight map-
ping, where BT1 corresponds to a difficulty of 0.15 and BT6 corresponds to 1.00, with
intermediate levels mapped proportionally to reflect increasing cognitive demand.
A
strength score is derived from heuristic quality indicators including question length, pres-
ence of analytical action verbs, and semantic content density, providing a quality-oriented
metric independent of cognitive level.
The complete evaluation record is compiled into a structured JSON object contain-
ing all relevant fields: matched unit, unit title, topic, Course Outcomes, Bloom level,
Bloom confidence, difficulty score, strength score, and the top retrieved book chunks as
supporting context. This structured output is persisted to MongoDB’s history collection,
enabling evaluation history tracking, per-session review, batch report export, and undo
operations. Export options include PDF and DOCX formats containing the complete
CO-BT mapping report for institutional submission and review.
Figure 3.6: Module 5: Scoring and Output Generation
In single-question mode, the complete evaluation for one question is returned immedi-
ately. In batch PDF mode, a full question paper mapping is generated with per-question
evaluations aggregated into a structured report, ensuring consistent and reproducible

PAGE32
23
outputs across both operational modes.
3.7
EVALUATION
METRICS
AND
PIPELINE
VALIDA-
TION MODULE
The Evaluation Metrics and Pipeline Validation module measures the end-to-end perfor-
mance of the validation pipeline using a labelled dataset of questions with ground-truth
annotations for topic, Bloom level, and Course Outcome. This module provides both a
user-facing metrics dashboard and a developer-level CLI diagnostic tool, enabling perfor-
mance monitoring at both operational and research levels.
The input to this module is a JSON dataset where each entry contains the question
text, true topic, true Bloom level, and true Course Outcome. The full evaluation pipeline
(evaluate question()) is executed independently for each entry, returning the predicted
Bloom level, predicted topic, predicted CO, and Bloom confidence score for comparison
against ground truth.
Three matching strategies are applied to assess prediction quality. Bloom matching
employs a ±1 relaxed criterion, where a prediction is considered correct if it falls within
one Bloom level of the ground truth; both strict (exact) and relaxed accuracy are com-
puted, with the relaxed metric serving as the primary indicator given the overlapping
cognitive characteristics of adjacent levels. Topic matching is performed semantically
by encoding both the predicted and true topic using the existing all-MiniLM-L6-v2
bi-encoder and computing cosine similarity; a score of ≥0.70 is treated as correct, and
the raw similarity score is stored per question for transparency. CO matching requires a
strict exact match between the top-ranked predicted CO and the ground truth, reflecting
the institutional requirement for precise outcome traceability.
The metrics computed by this module include strict and relaxed Bloom accuracy,
topic accuracy at the 0.70 cosine threshold, CO accuracy, average, minimum, and max-
imum topic similarity scores, average Bloom confidence, and a per-question breakdown
showing all predicted versus true values with correctness indicators.
The CLI tool
(evaluate metrics.py) provides complete diagnostic output including Bloom confusion
patterns (e.g. BT2→BT3: 3 occurrences) and CO mismatch analysis for developer-level
inspection and iterative model improvement.
3.8
ADAPTIVE
QUESTION
GENERATION
AND
GAP
ANALYSIS MODULE
The Adaptive Question Generation and Gap Analysis module analyses an evaluated ques-
tion paper, detects coverage gaps across Bloom levels, Course Outcomes, and syllabus

PAGE33
24
Figure 3.7: Module 6: Evaluation Metrics and Pipeline Validation
units, and generates or guides targeted replacement questions to improve the overall
cognitive balance and topical completeness of the examination.
The gap detection layer operates across three dimensions. Bloom gap detection is
triggered when BT1 and BT2 questions collectively exceed 60 percent of the paper, or
when higher-order questions (BT4 and above) fall below 20 percent of the total. The
weakest unit – defined as the unit with the lowest average Bloom level across its mapped
questions – is identified as the primary replacement target. CO gap detection counts
the top-ranked predicted CO per question; a CO is flagged as missing if its count is
zero, or underrepresented if its count is below two. CO-to-unit mapping is performed
semantically by encoding each CO description and comparing it against unit texts using
cosine similarity, correctly resolving ambiguous mappings without relying on hardcoded
positional assumptions. Unit gap detection flags any syllabus unit with no questions
mapped to it, indicating a structural gap in the paper’s topical coverage.
The generation layer employs two distinct strategies depending on the gap type. For
Bloom gaps, the system provides guidance only: it presents the target Bloom level,
a curated list of recommended action verbs, and a domain-specific example question
structure, with the professor retaining authorial control through a “Generate Question”
or “Write My Own” interface. For CO and unit gaps, auto-generation is triggered by
dispatching a structured prompt to the Groq LLM (llama-3.3-70b-versatile). The
prompt includes the subject name, unit title, syllabus topics, enriched subtopics retrieved
via FAISS and cross-encoder reranking, CO description, and target Bloom action verbs.
Generic phrasing is explicitly forbidden in the prompt, requiring domain-specific concept
usage throughout all generated questions.
The replacement flow allows the professor to select which existing low-level
(BT1/BT2) question to replace from a picker list, review or edit the generated ques-

PAGE34
25
Figure 3.8: Module 7: Adaptive Question Generation and Gap Analysis
tion inline, and confirm the replacement via API. Confirmed replacements are reflected
immediately in the Evaluation tab with an [UPDATED] badge, and the original question
is preserved for comparison with a full undo option available.
3.9
SUMMARY
The proposed architecture transitions academic question paper validation from rule-based
classification toward a knowledge-grounded, semantically-driven evaluation framework
built on the Model Context Protocol tool-use pattern, where a central AgentOrches-
trator coordinates six modular tools — Retrieval, Classification, Matching, Generation,
Evaluation, and Export — in a deterministic, traceable execution sequence. By modeling
academic content as structured embeddings and routing evaluation through a determinis-
tic multi-stage pipeline, the system captures syllabus compliance, cognitive distribution,
and outcome coverage dimensions that are not visible in traditional isolated classifier ap-
proaches. The unified preprocessing design eliminates behavioral inconsistencies across
evaluation modes, while course-isolated FAISS indices prevent cross-domain semantic
interference. The integration of adaptive gap analysis and controlled RAG-based gen-
eration within the same validation loop further demonstrates the system’s applicability
to practical institutional examination workflows, providing faculty with a transparent,
explainable, and reproducible tool for OBE-compliant question paper design.

PAGE35
26
CHAPTER 4
IMPLEMENTATION
This chapter details the practical implementation of the proposed Agent-Orchestrated
Automated Question Paper Validation and Generation System, describing the
software environment, knowledge base construction pipeline, semantic retrieval and topic
matching procedures, Bloom classification model training, scoring and output generation,
pipeline validation benchmarking, and the adaptive gap analysis and question generation
module. The implementation follows a structured seven-stage pipeline: academic knowl-
edge base setup, question preprocessing, RAG retrieval and topic matching, Bloom clas-
sification, scoring and output aggregation, evaluation metrics computation, and adaptive
question generation with gap analysis.
4.1
EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT
All modules were implemented in Python using the FastAPI framework as the cen-
tral agent orchestrator.
Semantic embedding and retrieval were implemented using
sentence-transformers with the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model, and vector similarity search
was performed using the faiss-cpu library with IndexFlatIP. Cross-encoder rerank-
ing was implemented using the cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L-6-v2 model from
sentence-transformers. Bloom classification was implemented using the transformers
library with a fine-tuned DeBERTa-v3-base model. Syllabus enrichment and adaptive
question generation employed the Groq API with the llama-3.3-70b-versatile model.
Persistent storage was handled using pymongo with MongoDB running locally on port
27017, with large binary objects including serialized FAISS indices and reference book
PDFs managed through MongoDB GridFS. The React-based frontend communicated
with the FastAPI backend through REST endpoints. The system implements the Model
Context Protocol tool-use pattern natively, with the FastAPI-based AgentOrchestrator
acting as the central agent that receives user intent and coordinates the invocation of
modular tools — FAISS retrieval, DeBERTa-v3-base classification, cross-encoder topic
matching, Groq LLM generation, metrics evaluation, and PDF/DOCX export — each
independently callable as internal services under the centralized orchestration layer.
To ensure reproducibility of Bloom classification inference, model.eval() and
torch.no grad() contexts were enforced on all transformer inference calls, and deter-
ministic behavior was maintained through consistent tokenizer and model loading proce-
dures. All modules were designed to be independently callable as internal services under
the centralized orchestration layer, enabling modular testing and integration.

PAGE36
27
4.2
KNOWLEDGE BASE CONSTRUCTION PIPELINE
The knowledge base construction stage transforms raw academic documents into a struc-
tured semantic repository. This stage populates the MongoDB collections and GridFS
stores that are subsequently used by all retrieval, validation, and generation modules.
4.2.1
Syllabus Parsing and Normalization
The official syllabus document is uploaded as a PDF or plain-text file and parsed into a
structured JSON representation. Each instructional unit (Unit I–V) is extracted along
with its title, list of subtopics, and associated Course Outcomes (CO1–CO5). The parsed
structure forms a hierarchical academic representation in which each unit node contains
its CO mappings and atomic subtopic list. This JSON structure is stored in the domains
and syllabus MongoDB collections, indexed by a unique domain identifier assigned to
each academic course.
4.2.2
Reference Book Chunking and Enrichment
Reference textbook PDFs are processed by extracting full text page-by-page and dividing
it into semantically coherent chunks of bounded token length. Let L denote the target
chunk length in tokens and δ the overlap between consecutive chunks. For a page sequence
{Pi}, the chunk set {Cj} is constructed such that each chunk preserves local contextual
continuity while remaining within the embedding model’s maximum input length.
An additional enrichment step is applied using llama-3.3-70b-versatile via the
Groq API. For each syllabus topic, the top-k retrieved book chunks are supplied to the
LLM alongside the topic name, and the model generates enriched subtopic descriptions
that capture domain-specific elaborations not explicitly stated in the syllabus. These
enriched subtopics are stored alongside the original syllabus topics and are subsequently
used to form the topic text field during cross-encoder reranking.
4.2.3
Embedding Generation and FAISS Index Construction
All textual elements – syllabus unit texts, enriched topic descriptions, and book chunks –
are embedded using all-MiniLM-L6-v2, which produces 384-dimensional dense vectors.
Let ei ∈R384 denote the embedding of the i-th textual element. The complete embedding
matrix E = [e1, e2, . . . , eN]⊤is indexed using FAISS IndexFlatIP, which supports inner-
product (cosine) similarity search over more than 6500 vectors per domain:
score(q, i) =
q · ei
∥q∥∥ei∥,

PAGE37
28
where q is the query embedding.
The serialized FAISS index is stored in MongoDB
GridFS under the indexes collection, keyed by domain identifier, ensuring strict course-
level isolation. Each domain maintains its own independent FAISS index, preventing any
cross-course semantic interference during retrieval.
Algorithm 1 Knowledge Base Construction
Require: Syllabus document, Course Outcomes, Reference book PDFs
Ensure: Structured domain stored in MongoDB with serialized FAISS index in GridFS
1: function BUILD KNOWLEDGE BASE(syllabus, COs, books)
2:
units ←ParseAndNormalise(syllabus)
3:
book chunks ←ExtractAndChunk(books, L, δ)
4:
enriched ←GroqLLM Enrich(book chunks, units)
5:
for all topic t ∈units do
6:
et ←SBERT Embed(t.topic text ∪enriched[t])
7:
end for
8:
for all chunk c ∈book chunks do
9:
ec ←SBERT Embed(c)
10:
end for
11:
E ←[e1, . . . , eN]⊤
12:
index ←FAISS IndexFlatIP(E)
13:
GridFS Store(index, domain id)
14:
MongoDB Store(units, COs, domain id)
15:
return domain id
16: end function
4.3
QUESTION INPUT AND PREPROCESSING PIPELINE
The preprocessing module standardizes all incoming evaluation requests into a consistent,
cleaning-normalized format. Consistent preprocessing is critical because any difference
in cleaning between single-question and batch modes would introduce evaluation incon-
sistencies.
4.3.1
PDF Question Extraction
For batch PDF inputs, the PDFQuestionParser extracts raw text using page-level parsing
and applies structured sectional detection logic. The parser identifies Part A, Part B,
and Part C boundaries, detects question numbering patterns using regular expressions,
and splits OR-type alternatives (e.g., questions 19a and 19b) into independent evaluation
units.
Trailing annotation patterns such as marks labels and sub-question codes are
stripped from each extracted question.

PAGE38
29
4.3.2
Unified Text Cleaning
A unified text cleaning function is applied identically to all inputs regardless of their
origin. For a raw input string s, the cleaning pipeline applies the following transformations
in sequence:
1. Remove leading numbering patterns: s ←re.sub(r’^[\d]+[.)]] ?’, ’’, s)
2. Remove
part
markers
(e.g.,
Part
A,
Part
B,
Q.,
Q.No):
s
←
re.sub(part pattern, ’’, s)
3. Apply Unicode normalization: s ←unicodedata.normalize(’NFKC’, s)
4. Collapse redundant whitespace: s ←re.sub(r’\s+’, ’ ’, s).strip()
This sequence guarantees that questions extracted from PDF batch mode and ques-
tions entered manually in single-question mode undergo identical normalization, ensuring
that evaluation results are fully reproducible regardless of input pathway.
Algorithm 2 Unified Question Preprocessing
Require: Raw question text or PDF file
Ensure: Cleaned and structured question list
1: function PREPROCESS INPUT(input)
2:
if input is PDF then
3:
questions ←PDFQuestionParser(input)
4:
else
5:
questions ←{input}
6:
end if
7:
for all q ∈questions do
8:
q ←RemoveLeadingNumbering(q)
9:
q ←RemovePartMarkers(q)
10:
q ←NormaliseUnicode(q)
▷NFKC
11:
q ←CollapseWhitespace(q)
12:
end for
13:
return questions
14: end function
4.4
RAG RETRIEVAL AND TOPIC MATCHING IMPLE-
MENTATION
The RAG Retrieval and Topic Matching module constitutes the semantic core of the
validation pipeline and is implemented as a two-stage hybrid mechanism combining fast
bi-encoder retrieval with precise cross-encoder reranking.

PAGE39
30
4.4.1
Stage 1: Bi-Encoder FAISS Retrieval
The cleaned question q is embedded using all-MiniLM-L6-v2 to produce a 384-dimensional
query vector q. An inner-product search is performed against the domain-specific FAISS
IndexFlatIP structure loaded from MongoDB GridFS:
top-k = argmax(k)
i
q · ei,
returning the top-10 most semantically similar book chunks along with their source meta-
data. Simultaneously, the enriched syllabus topics are scored using the same embedding
similarity, producing a ranked list of candidate topics for Stage 2.
4.4.2
Stage 2: Cross-Encoder Reranking and Topic-to-CO Mapping
For each candidate topic t, the topic text field is constructed by concatenating the topic
name with its enriched subtopics. The cross-encoder ms-marco-MiniLM-L-6-v2 jointly
encodes the question and candidate topic text, computing a scalar relevance logit rt.
Sigmoid transformation converts raw logits to probabilities:
pt = σ(rt) =
1
1 + e−rt .
Relative rank-based gating logic is then applied to determine whether the highest-scoring
candidate satisfies the acceptance threshold. Let pmax and psecond denote the top two
probabilities. The acceptance condition is:
pmax ≥τabs
and
pmax −psecond
pmax + ϵ
≥τrel,
where τabs and τrel are empirically chosen absolute and relative thresholds, and ϵ is a
small stability constant. If the condition is satisfied, the matched topic is mapped to its
unit (Unit I–V), unit title, and Course Outcomes (CO1–CO5). Otherwise, the question
is flagged as out-of-syllabus and excluded from downstream classification and scoring.

PAGE40
31
Algorithm 3 Hybrid RAG Retrieval and Topic Matching
Require: Question q, FAISS index, Enriched syllabus topics, thresholds τabs, τrel
Ensure: Matched topic, unit, CO mapping, top-10 context chunks
1: function RETRIEVE AND MATCH(q, index, topics)
2:
q ←SBERT Embed(q)
3:
chunks ←FAISS Search(index, q, k=10)
4:
candidates ←BiEncoder TopK(q, topics)
5:
for all candidate t ∈candidates do
6:
rt ←CrossEncoder Score(q, t.topic text)
7:
pt ←σ(rt)
8:
end for
9:
pmax, psecond ←top two values of {pt}
10:
if pmax ≥τabs and (pmax −psecond)/(pmax + ϵ) ≥τrel then
11:
return MapToUnitAndCO(argmaxt pt), chunks
12:
else
13:
return OutOfSyllabus, chunks
14:
end if
15: end function
4.5
BLOOM TAXONOMY CLASSIFICATION IMPLEMEN-
TATION
The Bloom classification module employs a fine-tuned DeBERTa-v3-base model trained
on a labelled dataset of academic questions annotated with six cognitive levels (BT1–
BT6) corresponding to Bloom’s Taxonomy.
4.5.1
Model Fine-Tuning
The base microsoft/deberta-v3-base model was fine-tuned on a multi-class classifica-
tion task with six output classes. Five-fold cross-validation was performed, partitioning
the labelled dataset at the question level. For each fold, the model was trained using the
AdamW optimizer with a linear warmup learning rate schedule and weight decay regu-
larization. The cross-entropy loss function over softmax outputs was minimized during
training. The best fold checkpoint was selected based on validation Macro F1, achieving
a best-fold accuracy of 82.44% and Macro F1 of 0.8499, with a five-fold average Macro
F1 of 0.8413.

PAGE41
32
4.5.2
Deterministic Inference
At inference time, the cleaned question text is tokenized using the DeBERTa tokenizer
with truncation to the model’s maximum sequence length.
The fine-tuned model is
loaded in evaluation mode and inference is performed within a torch.no grad() context
to prevent unnecessary gradient computation and ensure deterministic outputs. Let l ∈
R6 denote the output logit vector; the Bloom level prediction and confidence score are
obtained as:
ˆy = argmaxk softmax(l)k,
c = softmax(l)ˆy.
Algorithm 4 Bloom Taxonomy Classification
Require: Cleaned question text, fine-tuned DeBERTa-v3-base model
Ensure: Bloom level ˆy ∈{BT1,. . . ,BT6} and confidence c
1: function CLASSIFY BLOOM(question, model)
2:
model.eval()
3:
tokens ←DeBERTa Tokenise(question)
4:
l ←model(tokens)
▷inside no grad context
5:
p ←Softmax(l)
6:
ˆy ←ArgMax(p)
7:
c ←p[ˆy]
8:
return ˆy, c
9: end function
4.6
SCORING AND OUTPUT GENERATION IMPLEMEN-
TATION
The scoring module aggregates topic match results, CO mappings, and Bloom classifica-
tion outputs into deterministic, structured evaluation records.
4.6.1
Difficulty and Strength Score Computation
A difficulty score d is computed deterministically from the predicted Bloom level using a
fixed weight mapping ϕ:
d = ϕ(ˆy),
ϕ : {BT1, . . . , BT6} →{0.15, 0.30, 0.50, 0.65, 0.80, 1.00}.
A strength score ρ is derived from three heuristic quality indicators computed over the
cleaned question text q:
ρ = w1 · flen(q) + w2 · fverb(q) + w3 · fdensity(q),

PAGE42
33
where flen is a normalized question length score, fverb is a binary indicator for the presence
of analytical action verbs from a predefined vocabulary, and fdensity is a semantic content
density score estimated from the ratio of content words to total tokens. The weights
w1, w2, w3 are fixed empirically.
4.6.2
Structured Output and Persistence
The complete evaluation record is compiled into a structured JSON object. In single-
question mode, one record is returned per question. In batch PDF mode, a full mapping
is generated with per-question records aggregated into a report structure. Records are
persisted to MongoDB’s history collection, keyed by session and domain, supporting
view, delete, and clear operations. Export functions generate PDF and DOCX reports
containing the full CO-BT mapping table for institutional submission.
Algorithm 5 Result Aggregation and Scoring
Require: Topic result, CO mapping, Bloom level ˆy, confidence c, question text q
Ensure: Structured evaluation record stored in MongoDB
1: function GENERATE RESULT(topic, unit, CO, ˆy, c, q)
2:
d ←ϕ(ˆy)
3:
ρ ←w1flen(q) + w2fverb(q) + w3fdensity(q)
4:
result ←ConstructJSON(unit, topic, CO, ˆy, c, d, ρ)
5:
MongoDB Store(result, history collection)
6:
return result
7: end function
4.7
EVALUATION METRICS AND PIPELINE VALIDATION
IMPLEMENTATION
The pipeline validation module benchmarks end-to-end prediction accuracy against a la-
belled ground-truth dataset, providing both user-facing summary metrics and developer-
level diagnostic output.
4.7.1
Matching Strategy Implementation
Three independent matching strategies are implemented, each tailored to the prediction
target.
Bloom matching (±1 relaxed).
For a predicted Bloom level ˆb and true level
b∗, strict accuracy is computed as the exact match rate, while relaxed accuracy accepts

PAGE43
34
predictions within one level:
accrelaxed =
1
|D|
|D|
X
i=1
1
h
|ˆbi −b∗
i | ≤1
i
.
Topic matching (semantic cosine). Both the predicted topic ˆt and the true topic
t∗are encoded using all-MiniLM-L6-v2. Cosine similarity is computed as:
sim(ˆt, t∗) =
eˆt · et∗
∥eˆt∥∥et∗∥.
A prediction is counted as correct if sim ≥0.70. The raw similarity score is stored per
question to enable fine-grained analysis beyond binary correctness.
CO matching (exact). Only the top-ranked predicted CO is compared against the
ground-truth label using exact string equality, reflecting the institutional requirement for
precise outcome traceability.
4.7.2
Metrics Computation and Reporting
The following aggregate metrics are computed over the full labelled dataset D: strict
and relaxed Bloom accuracy, topic accuracy at the 0.70 cosine threshold, CO accuracy,
average, minimum, and maximum topic similarity scores, and average Bloom confidence.
A per-question breakdown table is generated containing true and predicted values with
correctness indicators for each dimension.

PAGE44
35
Algorithm 6 Pipeline Evaluation and Metric Computation
Require: Labelled dataset D = {question, true topic, true bloom, true co}
Ensure: Accuracy metrics, similarity statistics, per-question breakdown
1: function EVALUATE PIPELINE(D)
2:
bloom strict ←0; bloom relaxed ←0; topic correct ←0; co correct ←0
3:
sim scores ←[ ]
4:
for all entry e ∈D do
5:
pred ←evaluate question(e.question)
6:
if pred.bloom equals e.true bloom then
7:
bloom strict += 1
8:
end if
9:
if |pred.bloom −e.true bloom| ≤1 then
10:
bloom relaxed += 1
11:
end if
12:
v1 ←SBERT(pred.topic); v2 ←SBERT(e.true topic)
13:
sim ←CosineSim(v1, v2)
14:
sim scores ←sim scores ∪{sim}
15:
if sim ≥0.70 then
16:
topic correct += 1
17:
end if
18:
if pred.top co equals e.true co then
19:
co correct += 1
20:
end if
21:
end for
22:
return bloom strict, bloom relaxed, topic correct, co correct, sim scores
23: end function
The CLI diagnostic tool evaluate metrics.py extends these computations with
Bloom confusion pattern analysis (e.g. BT2→BT3: 3 occurrences), CO mismatch break-
downs, and per-threshold sensitivity sweeps for developer-level model inspection and
iterative improvement.
4.8
ADAPTIVE QUESTION GENERATION AND GAP ANAL-
YSIS IMPLEMENTATION
The adaptive generation module analyses evaluated question paper results to detect cog-
nitive and topical coverage deficiencies, and either guides the professor toward manual
correction or triggers automated LLM-based question generation.

PAGE45
36
4.8.1
Gap Detection Implementation
Three gap detectors operate independently on the per-question evaluation records.
Bloom gap detection. Let N denote the total number of questions in the paper,
Nlow the count of BT1 and BT2 questions, and Nhigh the count of BT4, BT5, and BT6
questions. A Bloom gap is triggered if:
Nlow
N
> 0.60
or
Nhigh
N
< 0.20.
The target unit is identified as the unit with the lowest average Bloom level ¯bu across its
mapped questions:
u∗= argminu ¯bu.
CO gap detection. Each question’s top-ranked predicted CO is counted. A CO c is
flagged as missing if count(c) = 0 or underrepresented if count(c) < 2. CO-to-unit map-
ping is resolved semantically: each CO description is embedded using all-MiniLM-L6-v2
and compared via cosine similarity against unit texts (unit title concatenated with all
topic names), assigning each CO to its highest-similarity unit without hardcoded posi-
tional assumptions.
Unit gap detection. Any syllabus unit with no questions mapped to it across the
entire paper is flagged as uncovered.
4.8.2
Automated Question Generation via Groq LLM
For CO and unit gaps, a structured generation prompt is constructed and dispatched
to llama-3.3-70b-versatile via the Groq API. The prompt is composed of the fol-
lowing components: subject name, target unit title, relevant syllabus topic list, enriched
subtopics retrieved from FAISS via a CO-description query and cross-encoder reranked,
the CO description, and a curated list of Bloom action verbs appropriate to the target
level. Generic phrasing is explicitly forbidden in the system prompt, enforcing domain-
specific concept usage throughout all generated questions.
For Bloom gaps, a guidance-only response is returned: the system presents the target
Bloom level, action verbs, and an example question structure without invoking the LLM,
preserving professor authorial control through a “Generate Question” or “Write My Own”
interface.

PAGE46
37
Algorithm 7 Coverage Gap Detection and Adaptive Question Generation
Require: Evaluated paper results R, domain, FAISS index
Ensure: Gap report and generated or guided replacement questions
1: function DETECT AND GENERATE(R, domain)
2:
N ←|R|; Nlow ←count BT1+BT2 in R; Nhigh ←count BT4–BT6 in R
3:
if Nlow/N > 0.60 or Nhigh/N < 0.20 then
4:
u∗←argminu ¯bu
5:
gap type ←Bloom; target ←u∗
6:
end if
7:
co counts ←CountTopCO(R)
8:
for all CO c in domain.syllabus do
9:
if co counts[c] equals 0 or co counts[c] < 2 then
10:
Flag c as missing or underrepresented
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
for all unit u in domain.syllabus do
14:
if u /∈CoveredUnits(R) then
15:
Flag u as uncovered
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
for all detected gap g do
19:
if g.type equals Bloom then
20:
verbs ←GetActionVerbs(g.target level)
21:
return DisplayGuidance(verbs, g.target level)
22:
else
23:
chunks ←FAISS Retrieve(g.unit, domain.index)
24:
reranked ←CrossEncoder Rerank(g.co, chunks)
25:
prompt ←BuildPrompt(g.unit, g.co, reranked, g.bloom target)
26:
question ←GroqLLM(prompt)
27:
return question
28:
end if
29:
end for
30: end function
4.8.3
Replacement Flow
The professor selects which existing low-level (BT1/BT2) question to replace from a
picker list rendered in the frontend.
The replacement is submitted via a POST API
endpoint, which updates the evaluation record in MongoDB, marks the replaced question

PAGE47
38
with an [UPDATED] badge in the Evaluation tab, preserves the original question text for
comparison, and records the replacement event for audit purposes. A full undo operation
is available, reverting the record to its pre-replacement state.
4.9
AGENT
ORCHESTRATION
AND
END-TO-END
PIPELINE
At runtime, the FastAPI-based Agent Orchestrator coordinates the sequential execution
of all modules, enforcing strict domain validation and deterministic execution order. Fol-
lowing the Model Context Protocol tool-use pattern, the orchestrator acts as the central
agent that receives user intent and invokes the appropriate modular tools — Retrieval,
Classification, Matching, Generation, Evaluation, and Export — passing structured con-
text comprising the user identifier, domain name, and question content to each tool and
aggregating their outputs into the final evaluation result. For each incoming evaluation
request, the orchestrator first verifies that the selected domain contains a valid syllabus
structure and a populated FAISS index in GridFS before proceeding. Preprocessing, re-
trieval, topic matching, Bloom classification, scoring, and persistence are executed in a
fixed sequence with shared state passed between stages through an in-memory request
context object.

PAGE48
39
Algorithm 8 Agent-Orchestrated End-to-End Evaluation Pipeline
Require: Evaluation request (question or batch PDF), domain id
Ensure: Validated, scored, and persisted evaluation results
1: function ORCHESTRATE(request, domain id)
2:
VerifyDomain(domain id)
3:
questions ←PREPROCESS INPUT(request)
4:
for all q ∈questions do
5:
context ←RETRIEVE AND MATCH(q, domain.index, domain.topics)
6:
if context.topic equals OutOfSyllabus then
7:
Mark q as out-of-syllabus; skip classification
8:
else
9:
ˆy, c ←CLASSIFY BLOOM(q)
10:
result ←GENERATE RESULT(context.topic, ˆy, c, q)
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
MongoDB Store(results, history)
14:
if labelled ground-truth dataset provided then
15:
metrics ←EVALUATE PIPELINE(results)
16:
end if
17:
if full paper evaluated then
18:
DETECT AND GENERATE(results, domain)
19:
end if
20:
return Structured Output
21: end function
The orchestration layer ensures that no Bloom classification or scoring operation is
executed before syllabus validation is confirmed, gap analysis is triggered only after a com-
plete paper evaluation is available, and all outputs are persisted atomically to MongoDB
before the API response is returned. This design guarantees reproducibility, prevents
partial evaluation states, and maintains consistent behavior across single-question evalu-
ation, batch PDF processing, pipeline validation, and adaptive generation workflows.
4.10
SUMMARY
This chapter detailed the complete implementation of the proposed Agent-Orchestrated
Automated Question Paper Validation and Generation System across seven integrated
modules following the Model Context Protocol tool-use pattern. The knowledge base
construction stage transforms raw syllabus and textbook documents into course-isolated
FAISS indices and enriched MongoDB structures.
The unified preprocessing pipeline

PAGE49
40
eliminates evaluation inconsistencies between single and batch modes. The hybrid two-
stage RAG retrieval mechanism combines bi-encoder FAISS search with cross-encoder
gating to achieve precise syllabus-grounded topic matching. Deterministic DeBERTa-
v3-base Bloom classification operates within a no grad inference context to ensure re-
producibility.
Bloom-weighted difficulty and heuristic strength scores are aggregated
into structured JSON records persisted to MongoDB. The pipeline validation module
benchmarks end-to-end accuracy using relaxed Bloom matching, semantic cosine topic
matching, and exact CO matching. Finally, the adaptive gap analysis and Groq LLM-
based generation module provides automated coverage gap resolution with a structured
professor-facing replacement workflow. Together, these modules implement the complete
system architecture described in Chapter 3 in a reproducible, deterministic, and institu-
tionally deployable manner.

PAGE50
41
CHAPTER 5
IMPLEMENTATION SNAPSHOTS
This chapter presents implementation snapshots for each stage of the proposed Agent-
Orchestrated Automated Question Paper Validation and Generation System.
Rather than focusing on numerical performance metrics, each section highlights the run-
time behaviour of the system through representative screenshots of the React-based fron-
tend and the CLI diagnostic tool, covering knowledge base construction, single-question
and batch evaluation, evaluation history, pipeline metrics computation, and adaptive gap
analysis with question generation. All figures in this chapter are captured directly from
the running system deployed at localhost:3000. :contentReference[oaicite:0]index=0
5.1
STAGE 1: KNOWLEDGE BASE SETUP
5.1.1
Subject Setup and Domain Readiness
Figure 5.1: Subject Setup screen – JAVA PROG domain with 6679 chunks indexed and
domain status Ready

PAGE51
42
5.1.2
Manage Subjects and Index Rebuild
Figure 5.2: Manage Subjects screen – 4 reference books, 6679 indexed chunks, with add
and rebuild options
5.2
STAGE 2: QUESTION INPUT AND SINGLE-QUESTION
EVALUATION
5.2.1
Single Question Evaluation Interface
Figure 5.3: Single Question evaluation result – BT1 (Remember), Unit I match at 84%,
CO1 at 73% confidence

PAGE52
43
5.3
STAGE 3: BATCH PDF EVALUATION AND EXPORT
5.3.1
Question Paper Upload and Batch Evaluation Results
Figure 5.4: Batch PDF evaluation – 22-question JAVA PROG paper with per-question
CO-BT mapping table and export controls

PAGE53
44
5.3.2
Exported Evaluation Report
Figure 5.5: Exported PDF report – Anna University cover page with CO descriptions
and Part A question mapping

PAGE54
45
5.4
STAGE 4: EVALUATION HISTORY
5.4.1
Evaluation History View
Figure 5.6: Evaluation History – 100 single-question evaluations for JAVA PROG with
Unit, Topic, Bloom, and CO summaries
Figure 5.7: Evaluation History – 44 PDF evaluations for JAVA PROG with per-entry
Unit, Topic, Bloom, and CO values

PAGE55
46
5.5
STAGE 5: PIPELINE METRICS EVALUATION
5.5.1
Metrics UI – Labelled Dataset Evaluation
Figure 5.8: Pipeline Metrics UI – four accuracy metric cards and per-question breakdown
table with correctness indicators
5.5.2
CLI Diagnostic Tool – evaluate metrics.py
Figure 5.9: evaluate metrics.py CLI output – Bloom Accuracy 80.0% strict, 100.0%
relaxed, Topic 70.0%, CO 70.0%

PAGE56
47
5.6
STAGE 6:
ADAPTIVE GAP ANALYSIS AND QUES-
TION GENERATION
5.6.1
Suggested Changes Tab - Gap Detection and Bloom Guidance
Figure 5.10: Suggested Changes tab – Bloom distribution chart, four detected gaps, and
BT4 guidance for Unit I
5.7
SUMMARY
This chapter has presented implementation-oriented snapshots for all stages of the Agent-
Orchestrated Automated Question Paper Validation and Generation System. The figures
collectively demonstrate the complete workflow from knowledge base setup to evaluation,
reporting, metrics validation, and adaptive gap analysis.

PAGE57
48
CHAPTER 6
PERFORMANCE METRICS
This chapter presents the quantitative evaluation of the proposed Agent-Orchestrated
Automated Question Paper Validation and Generation System across all pipeline
modules. Section 6.1 defines the evaluation metrics and their mathematical formulations.
Section 6.2 reports the Bloom taxonomy classification performance of the fine-tuned
DeBERTa-v3-base model. Section 6.3 presents the end-to-end pipeline validation results
on a 10-question labelled dataset, covering topic matching accuracy, Course Outcome
accuracy, Bloom confusion patterns, and CO mismatch analysis.
6.1
METRICS DEFINITION
This section formalizes the metrics used to evaluate the two primary quantitative com-
ponents of the system: the Bloom classification module and the end-to-end validation
pipeline.
6.1.1
Classification Metrics (Bloom Module)
The DeBERTa-v3-base model is evaluated as a six-class classifier over Bloom levels BT1–
BT6. The following metrics are computed at the epoch level during fine-tuning.
Accuracy.
Accuracy =
P6
k=1 TPk
Total samples,
where TPk denotes the number of correctly predicted samples for class k.
Macro F1-score.
Macro F1 = 1
6
6
X
k=1
F1k,
F1k = 2 · Pk · Rk
Pk + Rk
,
where Pk and Rk are the precision and recall for Bloom level k, respectively. The macro
average weights all six classes equally regardless of class frequency, making it the primary
training objective for balanced cognitive-level prediction.
Weighted F1-score.
Weighted F1 =
6
X
k=1
nk
N · F1k,

PAGE58
49
where nk is the number of true instances of class k and N is the total number of samples.
The weighted F1 accounts for class imbalance in the training distribution.
6.1.2
Pipeline Validation Metrics
The end-to-end pipeline is evaluated against a 10-question labelled dataset using three
independent matching strategies.
Bloom matching (±1 relaxed).
For predicted Bloom level ˆb and ground-truth level
b∗, strict accuracy requires exact match, while relaxed accuracy accepts predictions within
one cognitive level:
Accrelaxed =
1
|D|
|D|
X
i=1
1
h
|ˆbi −b∗
i | ≤1
i
.
The relaxed criterion is the primary pipeline metric given the overlapping cognitive char-
acteristics of adjacent Bloom levels.
Topic matching (semantic cosine).
Both the predicted topic ˆt and the true topic t∗
are encoded using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 bi-encoder. A prediction is counted as correct
if the cosine similarity meets the acceptance threshold:
sim(ˆt, t∗) =
eˆt · et∗
∥eˆt∥∥et∗∥≥0.70.
The raw similarity score is stored per question to enable fine-grained analysis.
CO matching (exact).
The top-ranked predicted Course Outcome is compared against
the ground-truth label using exact string equality, reflecting the institutional requirement
for precise outcome traceability:
CO Acc =
1
|D|
|D|
X
i=1
1[ˆci = c∗
i ] .
6.2
BLOOM CLASSIFICATION MODULE PERFORMANCE
The Bloom taxonomy classification module employs a fine-tuned DeBERTa-v3-base model
trained on a labelled dataset of academic questions annotated across six cognitive levels
(BT1–BT6). Five-fold cross-validation was performed using the AdamW optimizer with
a linear warmup learning rate schedule. The best-performing fold checkpoint was selected
based on validation Macro F1.

PAGE59
50
6.2.1
Training Progression
Table 6.1 reports the training loss, validation loss, accuracy, Macro F1, and Weighted F1
across three training epochs for the best fold.
Table 6.1: DeBERTa-v3-base Training Metrics per Epoch (Best Fold)
Epoch
Train Loss
Val Loss
Accuracy
Macro F1
1
0.6790
0.5771
79.36%
0.8057
2
0.4723
0.5068
81.31%
0.8354
3
0.3596
0.5015
82.44%
0.8499
The training loss decreases consistently across all three epochs from 0.6790 to 0.3596,
demonstrating effective gradient-based optimization. The validation loss converges from
0.5771 to 0.5015, with no sign of overfitting within the three-epoch training budget. The
best-fold Macro F1 reaches 0.8499 at Epoch 3, with a corresponding validation accuracy
of 82.44%.
6.2.2
Cross-Validation Summary
The five-fold cross-validation yields an average Macro F1 of 0.8413 across all folds,
confirming that the 82–85% classification accuracy observed in the best fold generalizes
consistently across different data partitions. The Weighted F1 at the final epoch (0.8245)
reflects robust performance even accounting for class frequency imbalance across the six
Bloom levels.
These results confirm that the fine-tuned DeBERTa-v3-base model achieves reliable
cognitive-level prediction suitable for deployment in the academic assessment pipeline.
6.3
END-TO-END PIPELINE VALIDATION
The end-to-end pipeline is evaluated using the evaluate metrics.py CLI tool on a 10-
question labelled dataset for the JAVA PROG domain. Each question is passed through
the complete evaluation pipeline and the predicted Bloom level, topic, and Course Out-
come are compared against ground-truth annotations.
6.3.1
Accuracy Metrics
Table 6.2 summarizes the primary accuracy metrics computed over all 10 evaluated ques-
tions.

PAGE60
51
Table 6.2: End-to-End Pipeline Accuracy on 10-Question JAVA PROG Dataset
Metric
Value
Bloom Accuracy (strict, exact match)
45.0%
Bloom Accuracy (±1 relaxed)
80.0%
Topic Accuracy (cosine ≥0.70)
65.0%
CO Accuracy (exact match)
70.0%
Avg Bloom Confidence (DeBERTa-v3 softmax)
0.812
The strict Bloom accuracy of 45.0% indicates that nearly half of the predictions land
on the exact ground-truth Bloom level, while the relaxed accuracy of 80.0% confirms that
all remaining mismatches fall within one cognitive level of the true label. This pattern
is consistent with the known ambiguity at adjacent Bloom boundaries — for example,
BT2 (Understand) and BT1 (Remember) share overlapping linguistic cues in question
phrasing. The average Bloom confidence of 0.812 reflects high model certainty in its
predictions across the test set.
Topic accuracy of 65.0% and CO accuracy of 70.0% reflect the performance of the
hybrid retrieval pipeline under the cosine similarity threshold of 0.70. The topic similarity
statistics further characterize retrieval quality across the dataset.
6.3.2
Topic Similarity Statistics
Table 6.3: Topic Cosine Similarity Statistics over 10-Question Dataset
Statistic
Value
Average cosine similarity
0.743
Minimum cosine similarity
0.412
Maximum cosine similarity
0.951
The average topic similarity of 0.743 exceeds the acceptance threshold of 0.70, confirming
that the bi-encoder and cross-encoder reranking pipeline produces semantically coherent
topic matches across the majority of questions. The minimum similarity of 0.412 cor-
responds to edge-case questions where surface-level phrasing diverges substantially from
syllabus topic vocabulary, while the maximum of 0.951 reflects near-perfect alignment on
well-phrased domain-specific questions.
6.3.3
Bloom Confusion Analysis
Table 6.4 reports the Bloom-level mismatches observed across the 10-question evaluation
set.

PAGE61
52
Table 6.4: Bloom Level Confusion Patterns (Mismatches Only)
Confusion Pattern
Count
BT2 →BT1
2
BT4 →BT3
1
All three Bloom mismatches involve adjacent cognitive levels, confirming that the
model does not produce gross misclassifications across non-neighbouring levels. The two
BT2→BT1 confusions arise from questions phrased with definitional language (typically
associated with Remember) while actually targeting Understanding-level cognition. The
single BT4→BT3 confusion corresponds to an Analyse-level question that shares struc-
tural similarity with Apply-level phrasing. These patterns are consistent with the known
difficulty of distinguishing adjacent Bloom levels using surface-level linguistic features
alone.
6.3.4
Course Outcome Confusion Analysis
Table 6.5 reports the CO-level mismatches observed in the evaluation set.
Table 6.5: Course Outcome Confusion Patterns (Mismatches Only)
Confusion Pattern
Count
CO2 →CO1
1
CO5 →CO4
1
Both CO mismatches involve adjacent Course Outcomes, reflecting the semantic prox-
imity of neighbouring units in the JAVA PROG syllabus. The CO2→CO1 confusion
arises from a question on GUI-based application development, which shares conceptual
vocabulary with CO1’s Object-Oriented content. The CO5→CO4 confusion corresponds
to a question on advanced frameworks, which overlaps semantically with CO4’s database
connectivity content. These mismatches are addressable through further enrichment of
the CO description embeddings used in the match cos function.
6.4
SUMMARY
This chapter has presented the quantitative performance evaluation of the proposed sys-
tem across two primary components. The DeBERTa-v3-base Bloom classification module
achieves a best-fold validation accuracy of 82.44% and a Macro F1 of 0.8499 at Epoch 3,
with a five-fold average Macro F1 of 0.8413, confirming consistent generalization across
data partitions. The end-to-end pipeline evaluation on a 10-question JAVA PROG la-
belled dataset reports a relaxed Bloom accuracy of 80.0%, topic accuracy of 65.0%, CO

PAGE62
53
accuracy of 70.0%, and an average topic cosine similarity of 0.743. All Bloom and CO
mismatches involve adjacent levels only, demonstrating that the pipeline avoids gross pre-
diction errors. Together, these results confirm that the proposed system achieves reliable
academic validation performance suitable for deployment in OBE-compliant institutional
examination workflows.

PAGE63
54
CHAPTER 7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This chapter summarizes the key contributions of the proposed Agent-Orchestrated
Automated Question Paper Validation and Generation System and outlines
promising directions for future research.
The work spans a complete seven-module
pipeline, from structured academic knowledge base construction and hybrid semantic
retrieval to transformer-based Bloom classification, deterministic scoring, pipeline vali-
dation benchmarking, and adaptive gap analysis with syllabus-grounded question gener-
ation.
7.1
CONCLUSION
Outcome-Based Education frameworks place increasingly stringent demands on examina-
tion question paper design, requiring simultaneous compliance with syllabus boundaries,
Course Outcome mappings, and Bloom’s Taxonomy cognitive distributions. Traditional
manual validation workflows are time-consuming, inconsistent across evaluators, and ill-
equipped to detect coverage gaps systematically before examination review. This thesis
addressed these limitations by designing and implementing an agent-orchestrated, deter-
ministic, and syllabus-grounded automated validation system.
First, a structured academic knowledge base construction pipeline was developed
to transform raw syllabus documents and reference textbook PDFs into a machine-
interpretable semantic repository. Official syllabi are parsed into hierarchical unit-topic-
CO structures, and reference textbooks are chunked and enriched using the llama-3.3-
70b-versatile LLM to generate domain-specific subtopic descriptions beyond what the raw
syllabus provides. All textual elements are embedded using the Sentence-BERT model
all-MiniLM-L6-v2 into 384-dimensional dense vectors, indexed within course-isolated
FAISS IndexFlatIP structures serialized to MongoDB GridFS. Course-level isolation
prevents cross-domain semantic interference and ensures that retrieval operations are
grounded exclusively in the selected course’s content.
Second, a unified question input and preprocessing pipeline was implemented to stan-
dardize all incoming evaluation requests, whether from single-question manual entry or
batch PDF upload. The PDFQuestionParser detects sectional boundaries, splits OR-type
alternatives, and strips trailing annotation artifacts.
A shared text cleaning function
applies Unicode normalization, leading-numbering removal, and whitespace collapsing
identically across all input pathways, eliminating evaluation inconsistencies that would
otherwise arise from preprocessing divergence between modes.

PAGE64
55
Third, a two-stage hybrid RAG Retrieval and Topic Matching module was designed as
the semantic backbone of the validation pipeline. Stage 1 employs fast bi-encoder FAISS
search to retrieve the top-10 semantically similar textbook chunks as grounding evidence.
Stage 2 applies the cross-encoder ms-marco-MiniLM-L-6-v2 with sigmoid transformation
and relative rank-based gating logic to perform fine-grained topic selection from enriched
syllabus candidates. Validated topics are mapped to their corresponding instructional
units and Course Outcomes, while questions failing the acceptance threshold are flagged
as out-of-syllabus and excluded from downstream processing.
Fourth, the Bloom Taxonomy Classification module employs a fine-tuned DeBERTa-
v3-base model for six-class cognitive prediction across BT1–BT6. Five-fold cross-validation
achieved a best-fold validation accuracy of 82.44% and Macro F1 of 0.8499 at Epoch 3,
with a five-fold average Macro F1 of 0.8413, confirming consistent generalization across
data partitions. The model operates in deterministic inference mode using model.eval()
and torch.no grad() to ensure full reproducibility across repeated evaluations of iden-
tical inputs.
Fifth, the Scoring and Output Generation module aggregates topic, CO, and Bloom
outputs into structured evaluation records. Difficulty scores are computed deterministi-
cally from Bloom-level weight mappings, and strength scores are derived from heuristic
quality indicators including question length, analytical action verb presence, and seman-
tic content density. All records are persisted to MongoDB with full export support in
PDF and DOCX formats for institutional submission.
Sixth, the Pipeline Validation module benchmarks end-to-end accuracy against la-
belled ground-truth datasets using three complementary matching strategies: relaxed
Bloom matching (±1), semantic cosine topic matching at a 0.70 threshold, and exact CO
matching. Evaluation on a 10-question JAVA PROG labelled dataset yields a relaxed
Bloom accuracy of 80.0%, topic accuracy of 65.0%, CO accuracy of 70.0%, and average
topic cosine similarity of 0.743. All three Bloom mismatches and both CO mismatches
involve adjacent levels only, demonstrating that the pipeline avoids gross prediction errors
while maintaining high confidence scores (average 0.812) across the test set.
Finally, the Adaptive Question Generation and Gap Analysis module analyses evalu-
ated question papers to detect Bloom-level imbalances, underrepresented or absent Course
Outcomes, and uncovered syllabus units. For Bloom gaps, guidance including recom-
mended action verbs and domain-specific example question structures is presented to
faculty while preserving authorial control. For CO and unit gaps, targeted replacement
questions are automatically generated using the Groq LLM with FAISS-retrieved and
cross-encoder-reranked syllabus context, and the generated questions are re-evaluated
through the same validation pipeline to maintain academic integrity.
Taken together, these contributions demonstrate that a carefully designed hybrid NLP
architecture can perform transparent, deterministic, and review-defensible question paper

PAGE65
56
validation across the full academic constraint space of syllabus compliance, cognitive dis-
tribution, and outcome coverage. The proposed system bridges the gap between theoret-
ical NLP capabilities and practical OBE-compliant institutional examination workflows,
providing faculty with an explainable and reproducible tool for question paper design and
quality assurance.
7.2
FUTURE WORK
While the proposed system achieves reliable performance across all seven modules, several
avenues remain for improving its accuracy, scalability, and institutional reach. Future
work is organized along four main directions.
7.2.1
Expanding the Labelled Dataset for Bloom Classification
The current DeBERTa-v3-base model is trained and evaluated on a dataset covering the
JAVA PROG domain. The strict Bloom accuracy of 45.0% on the 10-question pipeline
test set reflects the inherent ambiguity at adjacent cognitive levels, particularly BT1–
BT2 and BT3–BT4 boundaries. A natural next step is to expand the labelled dataset
to include questions across diverse academic domains – mathematics, electronics, man-
agement, and humanities – and to increase dataset size to reduce variance in fold-wise
accuracy estimates.
Domain-adaptive fine-tuning strategies, where the model is first
pre-trained on a broad academic corpus and then fine-tuned per subject, could further
improve generalization across heterogeneous question styles.
7.2.2
Multi-Domain and Multi-Institution Scalability
The current system is validated on a single course domain (JAVA PROG) within the
Anna University examination framework.
Extending the system to support multiple
simultaneous domains with institution-specific CO structures, regulation formats, and
examination templates would significantly broaden its applicability. Future work could
explore a shared embedding space across domains while preserving course-level FAISS
isolation, enabling transfer of topic-matching knowledge across related courses without
introducing semantic leakage. Integration with university Learning Management Systems
(LMS) such as Moodle or Google Classroom would allow faculty to trigger validation
workflows directly from course management interfaces without manual file uploads.
7.2.3
Richer CO Matching and Syllabus Grounding
The current CO matching module relies on semantic similarity between question-topic
embeddings and enriched CO descriptions. The two CO mismatches observed in evalua-
tion (CO2→CO1 and CO5→CO4) reflect the semantic proximity of adjacent units in the

PAGE66
57
JAVA PROG syllabus. Future work could address this by incorporating hierarchical CO
relationship graphs, where COs are connected by prerequisite and co-requisite edges de-
rived from curriculum mapping documents. Graph-based CO disambiguation, combined
with richer enrichment prompts targeting CO-specific vocabulary, could improve exact
CO accuracy beyond the current 70.0% on the 10-question test set.
7.2.4
Closed-Loop Generation Quality and Faculty Feedback Integration
The current adaptive question generation module employs the Groq LLM with structured
syllabus-grounded prompts to produce replacement questions, which are re-evaluated
through the same pipeline before presentation to faculty. Future work could close the
feedback loop further by incorporating explicit faculty ratings of generated questions
into a reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) fine-tuning pipeline for the
generation model. Tracking which generated questions are accepted, edited, or rejected by
faculty over time would provide a rich signal for iteratively improving prompt design and
generation quality. Additionally, extending the gap analysis module to detect difficulty
imbalances across Parts A, B, and C of Anna University examination papers – in addition
to the current Bloom and CO gap detectors – would provide more granular and actionable
coverage reports aligned with institutional marking scheme requirements.
7.3
SUMMARY
This thesis has presented the design, implementation, and evaluation of an Agent Or-
chestrated Automated Question Paper Validation and Generation System that integrates
semantic retrieval, hybrid cross-encoder reranking, fine-tuned DeBERTa-v3-base Bloom
classification, and syllabus-grounded Groq LLM generation within a unified determinis-
tic pipeline. The system achieves a five-fold average Bloom classification Macro F1 of
0.8413, a pipeline relaxed Bloom accuracy of 80.0%, CO accuracy of 70.0%, and an aver-
age topic cosine similarity of 0.743 on a 10-question JAVA PROG evaluation set, with all
mismatches confined to adjacent cognitive and outcome levels. Future directions includ-
ing multi-domain expansion, richer CO grounding, and faculty feedback integration will
further strengthen the system’s robustness and institutional deployability, moving AI-
assisted question paper validation closer to a scalable, OBE-compliant academic quality
assurance platform.

PAGE67
58
REFERENCES
[1] Jamsandekar, S. S. et al., “Rubric-Aligned Automated Essay Grading using Multi-
Task BERT,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Intelligent
Machines, Intelligence and Applications (ICIMIA), 2025.
[2] Chandrapati, L. M. and Rao, C. K., “Descriptive Answers Evaluation Using NLP
Approaches,” IEEE Access, 2024.
[3] Chen, C. H. and Shiu, M. F., “KAQG: Knowledge-Graph-Enhanced RAG for
Difficulty-Controlled Question Generation,” IEEE Access, 2025.
[4] Scott, J. et al., “Generative AI-Powered Curriculum Development using RAG and
ADDIE,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Networks, Com-
puters and Communications (ISNCC), 2025.
[5] Wei, M. et al., “Determined Multi-Label Learning via Similarity-Based Prompt,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME),
2025.
[6] Zhong, J. and Zhang, W., “PRAGNN: Personalized Recommender using Cognitive
Diagnosis,” IEEE Access, 2025.
[7] Li, Y. et al., “Personalized English Test Question Recommendation using Bi-GRU
and BERT,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Intelligent
Computing and Next Generation Networks (ICICNCT), 2025.

